atest: Analog audio loopback test tool


atest serves to test the integrity of an analog audio transmission.  It can
be compiled with loopback support for use with an analog ALSA device with a
cable that connects the output to the input on the same board.

Alternatively, it can also be compiled without loopback support and will
read and write a sound file instead, removing the dependency on ALSA and its
libraries.

It uses the Q15X25 HAM radio codec to send different messages down the
channels of the output and decodes what is recevied on the input. If the
messages match, the test passes. If no valid data was received, or the
message is not correct, the test fails. This allows detection of
non-working as well as swapped audio channels.

There are several command-line options:

	-d	--device	ALSA device to use (default: "default")
	-c	--channels	number of channels to test (default: 2)
	-s	--samplerate	hardware sample rate (Hz, default: 48000)
	-b	--bps		Q15X25 codec bit rate (default: 2500)
	-f	--fec		forward error correction level (default: 1)
	-v	--verbose	increase verbosity level (default: 0)

If compiled without loopback support, the --device option is removed and the
following options are added:

	-S	--samplesize	sample bit rate (8/16/24 bit)
	-r	--read		read from file
	-w	--write		write to file
	-o	--filename	name of WAV file to be written to/read from

atest exits with 0 on success, or with the number of failed channels
if any. An exit code of 64 or more indicates an error setting up the audio
device or accessing the sound file.

atest depends on libasound if compiled for loopback testing, and libsndfile
if not. It also depends on libz, which is used for checksumming data packets.


Since we are dealing with analog audio signals, correct mixer settings are
very important for successful operation. Unfortunately, these settings
differ considerably between boards both in name and in the appropriate
levels. The following amixer commands set up the analog audio on the
Renesas R8A7795 Salvator-X board correctly:

amixer sset "DVC Out" 50%
amixer sset "Digital Playback Volume1" 50%
amixer sset "DVC In" 20%


If you need to calibrate the mixer settings for a board remotely, you can
run atest with increased verbosity ("-vvvv") and look for the tune tone
message from the decoder, which should look something like this:

Tune tones: -0.0Hz/16.2dB  -0.0Hz/16.2dB  +0.0Hz/16.2dB  -0.0Hz/16.3dB  

- If this line is absent, you don't have a connection, or the input or output
side is muted.
- If the indicated levels are too low (less than 10-12dB), mixer settings on
at least one end are too low.
- If the levels seem okay, but no valid message is received, it is probably
because of distortion, i.e. the mixer levels on one or both sides are too
high.

On very noisy links, it may help to increase the level of forward error
correction; values up to 3 are supported.
